I wrote an audio-article in which I said that both OCD and philosophy were about retreating from the exigencies of external actual reality into the safety of internal pseudo-reality. And in keeping with this, I said that both OCD and philosophy are intellectualized impotence. I am obviously not the first to say this about philosophy. And I’m probably not even the first to say that it holds of both OCD and philosophy. But I am probably one of the first to say that what we are dealing with here is not a mere analogy but a veritable homology, in that, from a psychopathologist’s viewpoint, OCD and philosophy are cut from the very same cloth.
In any case, a listener of mine who goes by the name of L and H Productions, made the following point in response to my article. He said: “What about political philosophers? Don’t they engage the world? Aren’t they a counterexample to your contention that philosophy is about autistic non-engagement?”
Yes and no. Mostly no. Consider Plato, as he is a paradigm case of a political philosopher. Plato’s system was completely a priori. Yes—he was talking about how to reform the world. But really, that isn’t what he was doing. He was really talking about how to replace the world with a world of his own—a world that had little reality, and little justification, outside of his own thought-space. So Plato was really talking about replacing the actual world his thought-world. He wasn’t in any real way engaging the actual world.
And the absurdity of what Plato was doing comes out in a lot of ways: in, for example, the rigidity of the society that he was proposing; in the stereotyped—and in that respect decidedly OCD---protocols governing both education and, more generally, interactions between different people; and, moreover, in the absurd idea, put forth in his dialogue The Laws, that even the most minor violations of law should be punished by death; and, finally, in the incoherent idea that society should be ruled by a philosopher king— incoherent, because societies are to be run by sapient doers, not sapient thinkers--- by people who do not flee from the world into intellectual constructions---and are therefore not to be run by philosophers, granting, of course, that they are to be run by people who are philosopher-like to the
